# On New Terrain by Kim Moody #
> The argument here is that while economic slumps destroyed jobs (and capital), productivity increases, extracted mainly through work intensification even where new technology was involved and even during the recessions, prevented the growth of manufacturing jobs when recovery came and output expanded in each decade. Furthermore, as a close look at indexes for real merchandise imports and manufacturing jobs in appendix B shows, when imports fell in recessions, so did the number of jobs, whereas when imports soared between recessions, the number of jobs remained basically flat due to increased output. If it had been primarily imports of either final products or intermediate inputs that had taken these manufacturing jobs, overall output could hardly have been so robust in the years between recessions.  
>
> Globalization, of course, does have an impact on US employment and income levels as well as on the developments discussed below. The two major impacts that matter most for this analysis are increased competition faced by US capital at home and abroad, on the one hand, and immigration caused mainly by the dispossession of people around the world by capitalism’s expansion and the neoliberal policies that enable it as well as the wars it has spawned. Competition drives the productivity that eliminates manufacturing jobs, while immigrants fill the growing number of lower-paid occupations associated with the rise of service-producing employment as well as some manufacturing and logistics industries.  
>

> The process of accumulation, as Marx argued, itself leads to “the diminution of the mass of labour in proportion to the mass of means of production moved by it” due to increasing productivity. And, as we will see below, the mass of capital in relation to labor did, indeed, increase over this period. The degree to which increased productivity is extracted and labor thereby relatively diminished, however, is to a large extent determined by class struggle within the labor process as well as by the competition between capitals. While the struggle over wages is always a piece of class conflict, for most of the post–World War II era in the United States it was the fight over relative surplus value, that is, the fight to reduce the time during the working day needed to cover the cost of labor power by increasing productivity that has been capital’s major focus.  
>

> Lean production was introduced from Japan into the United States in the 1980s, and its stated object was always to eliminate “waste,” meaning buffers that slowed production, high inventory levels, imperfect parts, and “idle” labor time in the production process. Appropriately dubbed “management by stress” by Mike Parker and Jane Slaughter of Labor Notes, lean methods constantly stressed the production system to locate and eliminate all non-value-producing labor. As Toyota’s lean pioneer Taiichi Ohno put it, “Manpower reduction means raising the ratio of value-added work.”26 Here lean production will be used as shorthand for the multitude of programs introduced over time in this long period to impose measurable and standardized work processes (metrics) and further reduce labor input in relation to output, such as total quality management (TQM), statistical process control (SPC), Six Sigma, and so on. Virtually all these methods of control came into practice in the 1980s along with human resource management (HRM) and supply chain management (SCM) as new disciplines and are now global in their application. While the various lean methods were often applied selectively or partially, most, like Six Sigma, have “come to be integrated with lean principles,” as one recent study of the auto industry noted.27 Although the auto industry led in the application of lean production norms, innovations sometimes came from elsewhere. “Data-driven” Six Sigma was developed by Motorola in the mid-1980s and soon adopted by General Electric, but not adopted by Ford, for example, until 2000. By now it is used “all over the world, in organizations as diverse as local government departments, prisons, hospitals, the armed forces, banks, and multinational corporations.”  
>
> While in its classic form lean production was characterized by a number of features, such as the Andon Board, kaizen or continuous improvement teams, job rotations, just-in-time delivery of parts, et cetera, at its heart was the fight over time. The just-in-time (JIT) standard for the auto industry, and by implication most manufacturing, went from a three-day delivery “window,” to “a thirty-minute time frame.”29 This obviously put enormous pressure on suppliers and their workers. This emphasis on time was not merely the lengthening of hours for some and their shortening for others involved in the new “flexibility” demanded by capital, but the time worked actually producing value within each day, hour, and minute. It is, in short, about the *intensification* of work. This is one reason why the introduction of programs designed to measure performance, such as SPC and Six Sigma, have become so important. Ostensibly meant to reduce errors and variations in outcomes, they aid in the standardization, measurement, and intensification of the labor process.  
>

> Technology, including that in the actual production process, also plays a role in this beyond surveillance, but, as is almost always the case, not as a substitute for the burdens of labor but as the enabler and enforcer of its intensification. Given the limits on the length of the workday imposed by law, custom, or union agreement, as Marx put it, “machinery becomes in the hands of capital the objective means, systematically employed, for squeezing out more labor in a given time.”41 Since Marx’s day, works by Nobel, Braverman, and others have shown that the design and use of technology is socially constructed to intensify management control, reduce worker skills, and increase efficiency and output. As Noble put it writing about post–World War II developments in automation, the concerns of those who designed and deployed the new technology were “reflected in a general devaluation of human skills and a distrust of human workers and in an ongoing effort to eliminate both” in the name of efficiency and, of course, reducing human toil.  
>
> All of these changes taken together have led to one of the biggest job-destroying intensifications of labor in the history of capitalism. By the second decade of the twenty-first century, if you survived the process, your job had been stressed, reengineered, measured, monitored, standardized, intensified, and connected just in time to another stressed, reengineered, etc., job while you and your fellow workers had been informed that you were the organization’s most valuable asset. After all, who could produce so much surplus value so fast at virtually no extra cost?  
>

> The rise of employment in occupations and industries labeled as “services” is not new. Service employment surpassed that in goods production by mid-century in the United States. One reason why service jobs tend to outstrip those in goods production is the difference in hours worked and productivity. Workers in manufacturing, construction, transportation, and warehousing and utilities work an average of forty hours a week, while those in administration, waste, health and social services, food services, and accommodations average about thirty hours per week—hence the growing number of part-time workers. While some services have achieved high rates of productivity under lean conditions, others, such as food services and accommodations (0.8 percent) and janitorial services (1.9 percent), fall well behind the 3 percent annual rate for manufacturing. It is precisely this low productivity that makes it possible to employ part-time workers because any rise in productivity over the workday, such as we saw in manufacturing above, will be minimal, so that shorter hours are profitable in this case. Low wages, on the other hand, keep unit labor costs down, making workforce expansions economical for the employer. As a consequence of shorter hours and low productivity, an increase in output in services requires proportionately more workers than in manufacturing or transportation. But which services are driving this growth?  
>
> Those service jobs that grew over the years were largely the creation of the internal dynamics of capital accumulation and two of its ongoing cost problems resulting from the postwar growth of the US economy: the social reproduction of labor power and the maintenance of its expanding fixed facilities—not primarily or even significantly as a result of the personal spending habits of the rich. Social reproduction is the labor expended in child rearing, family maintenance, elder care, and other forms of labor required to reproduce the species. Historically, this was unpaid labor performed by women mostly in the home, though, as we will see, it has now been partially transformed into commodity production, also often performed by women. Looking at those private-sector services most likely to employ working-class people (excluding finance, insurance, and real estate [known collectively as “FIRE”] and professional services), service jobs grew by 14.2 million from 1990 to 2010. Some eight million of those jobs or 57 percent of total growth were in employment associated with the labor of social reproduction, such as health and social care and food services. In other words, much of the increase in service work centers on society’s need to reproduce its workforce—both active and potential.  
>

> In the United States to a greater degree than other developed economies, many of the services involved in the social reproduction of labor power fell to the private sector. Capital, ever ready to extend the hand of exploitation, and as Marx put it, “always seeking out new areas of investment,” moved to fill the gap. As a result, a growing proportion of the labor of reproduction—child and elder care, health maintenance, food preparation, and so on—once done in the home or family has been commodified and provided by profit-making businesses as families had to buy more of the services that underlie social reproduction. For example, in 1982 Americans spent 40 percent of their food expenditures eating out, while by 2010 this was up to 49 percent. Health care expenditures grew from 4.7 percent of average consumer income in 1985 to 6.4 percent in 2009. The workforce delivering most of these services outside of the home, however, remained disproportionately female.  
>

> Indeed, for Marx and Engels, precariousness in the broadest sense was the normal condition of the working class. The process of capital accumulation necessarily spins off a part of the workforce, as we saw above in the extreme case of manufacturing in the United States where productivity destroyed millions of jobs. In Marx’s words, “It is capital accumulation itself that constantly produces, and produces indeed, in direct relation to its own energy and extent, a relatively redundant working population, i.e., a population which is superfluous to capital’s average requirements for its own valorization, and is therefore a surplus population.” This ongoing process forms and reforms a vast industrial reserve army of labor composed not only of the unemployed but of those “marginally attached to the labor force,” as the BLS puts it, those between jobs, discouraged workers, those outside the labor force at any moment, those in temporary employment, women in the home, students, and so on. This is not a permanent body of individuals, some precariat separate from the working class as a whole. As Marx argues, the rise of new industries and the system’s periodic crises depend on “the constant formation, the greater or less absorption, and the re-formation of the industrial reserve army or surplus population.” Thus, this army constantly drafts and discharges from the ranks of the working class as a result of both long-term and cyclical trends.  
>

> In a sense, the debate over just how much employment is or isn’t precarious misses the bigger change in working-class life over the past three decades— the decline in living standards and working conditions experienced by the vast majority of this class. As we saw above, work intensification has become the norm, while the standardization of work has, if anything, increased the deskilling and degradation of work analyzed years ago by Braverman. Looking at the economic side of working-class life, one measure of declining living standards is the fall in both hourly and weekly real wages, which despite some ups and downs remain below their 1972 level. By 2011 28 percent of all workers earned less than the official poverty-level wage of $11.06 an hour. So stagnant has been the income of the working-class majority that 30 percent of the workforce, and clearly a higher percentage of those in working-class employment, now relies on public assistance to get by.  
>

> Work for the vast majority of working-class employees is far more intensive and demanding, likely to pay less and offer fewer benefits, with less state provision to fall back on, so that the rate at which workers are exploited is much greater than during the last period of upsurge in the 1960s and 1970s. Even growing numbers of professionals face the contagion of capitalist exploitation along with job standardization and degradation. On the outer edges of the working class, experiencing many of the same problems are the “proletarianizing” professionals such as teachers, nurses, and various technicians and engineers whose traditional autonomy has been crushed in the vice of measured and monitored standardization and lean just-in-time requirements as capital extends and deepens its authority over an increasing number of professions. The rebellion of such professionals, notably teachers and nurses in recent years, is a sign of how capitalism’s expansion inevitably ensnares and encloses more and more of those who must work for a living.  
>
> The results for capital have been dramatic. That the growth of extreme economic inequality in the United States is the result of the trends discussed above that began as the neoliberal era opened are confirmed in Thomas Piketty’s monumental study where he writes: “Since 1980, however, income inequality has exploded in the United States. The upper decile’s (10 percent of the population) share increased from 30–35 percent of national income in the 1970s to 45–50 percent in the 2000s—an increase of 15 points of national income.” In fact, as he shows, the bulk went to the now notorious “1 percent,” who alone gobbled up half that increase. This makes the United States more unequal economically than any European nation, even though inequality has grown there as well. The starting point for this soaring inequality is found in the capital-labor relationship.  
>

> Even many of those among the sales and office workers are now often concentrated in relatively large work settings such as big-box retailers, supermarkets, Internet retailers, call centers, and so on. Given the dynamics of capital’s constant push to control and standardize all forms of work, many in the middle class, who belong in proletarianizing professions such as teaching and nursing, who compose almost a quarter of the middle class, are increasingly approximating the conditions of working-class work and existence. We see this in the successful organizing and many strikes of nurses and teachers in particular. If these two groups and the leaps in consciousness they have displayed in recent years are at all typical, the numerical growth of the working class will be accompanied by increased militancy and class consciousness.  
>
> The working class, as opposed simply to the workforce, of course, is composed not only of its employed members but of nonworking spouses, dependents, relatives, the unemployed, and all those who make up the reserve army of labor. If working-class people in employment make up just under two-thirds of the workforce, those in the class amount to at least three-quarters of the population—the overwhelming majority. As teachers, nurses, and other professionals are pushed down into the working class, the majority grows even larger. If the “99 percent” popularized by the Occupy movement is not quite accurate, there being too many middle-class people tied materially and mentally to the capitalist class, the percentage of those whose fundamental interests are opposed to capital nonetheless moves in that direction.  
>
> The industrial, occupational, and ethno-racial changes in the demographics of the working class over the past three decades or more tell only half the story of the remaking of the US working class. Equally if not more important are both the new terrain on which class conflict occurs and the new sources of power this brings to many sections of the class formerly thought of as peripheral; closer to the core in their conditions and settings of work and in the leverage they have over capital’s restructured and reorganized processes of production. Millions of service, sales, and even office workers now work in larger, more capital-intensive workplaces, embedded in larger concentrations of capital, and owned by fewer capitalists. They are increasingly linked together in vulnerable technology-driven supply chains, themselves organized around enormous logistics clusters that concentrate tens and even hundreds of thousands of workers in finite geographical sites. It is to this side of class formation that we now turn.  
>

> Even as capital in the United States was consolidating in industry after industry, the ties that bind the production of goods and services together, whether locally or across space, were tightening in new and important ways. As Marx noted, “The revolution in the modes of production of industry and agriculture made necessary a revolution in the general conditions of the social process of production, i.e., in the means of communications and transport.” This is, of course, an ongoing process, and one of the outstanding features of the restructuring of the production of goods and services in the era of lean production and new technology has been the reorganization of supply chains—the so-called “logistics revolution.” Supply chains have long been part of the production of goods and services. The rise of global value or supply chains and the geographic relocation of domestic production and suppliers first experienced as fragmentation, however, have, like consolidation in business organization, brought about their opposite in a dramatic geographic and technological reorganization of supply chains, a “revolution” in “the means of communication and transport,” as Marx put it.  
>
> One of the most important changes in the reorganization of supply chains is their geography, the concentration of workers in key “nodes” or “clusters,” along with their technological drivers and linkages. If suppliers have relocated to lower-cost areas within the United States or even offshore, bringing about a degree of vertical “dis-integration,” the sinews of transportation that move both intermediate and final products (including imports) within the United States have been reconfigured into enormous “logistics clusters” of transportation hubs, massive warehouses and distribution centers, “aerotropolises,” sea-ports, intermodal yards, and sophisticated technology that bring tens of thousands of workers into finite geographic concentrations, mostly in or adjacent to large urban metropolitan areas. While there are about sixty such clusters in the United States, the biggest of these are found around Chicago, Los Angeles, and along the New Jersey Turnpike in the New York–New Jersey port area, each concentrating at least 100,000 workers.  
>

> All the metropolitan sites of the major logistics clusters are also homes to large “ghettos” and “barrios” housing huge numbers of unemployed and underemployed working-class people who are to a large extent “enclosed,” both spatially and occupationally, by racial segregation and discrimination, the disappearance or drastic shrinking of previous employment possibilities in manufacturing or the public sector, and the diminution of state benefits— they are the quintessential reserve army of labor. As such, the workers that maintain the internal infrastructure, fill the warehouses, and move things around within the cluster are paid poorly and treated as dispensable. On the other hand, the existence of this large reserve army of low-paid labor limits the locations of the biggest logistics hubs to large metropolitan areas that house these workers. This is the unspoken locational “metric” that makes the Los Angeles, Chicago, and the New York–New Jersey metropolitan areas, the country’s three largest metropolitan statistical areas with their millions of low-income Black and Latino people and relatively high poverty and unemployment rates, the biggest logistics clusters of all.  
>

> Eric Hobsbawm described the sort of conditions that led to what he calls “leaps” or “explosions” of strike activity and union growth as “accumulations of inflammable materials which only ignite periodically, as it were under compressions.” This, too, describes well the conditions that have accumulated in stages over the past three decades: lean production, electronic and biometric forms of work measurement and monitoring, the new contours of just-in-time supply chains, and the “logistics revolution”—each adding to time pressures and work intensification. None of these changes by themselves produced sufficient “compression” or the spark that could ignite a new labor upsurge, but in the last decade or so, perhaps delayed by the dislocations of the Great Recession, the convergence of these changes has embraced more and more sections of the US working class. On top of this has come the increasing decline in living standards as real incomes shrink, “the social wage” fades, and political attacks on workers and unions increase—this in a rich country where billionaires grow like weeds.  
>
> We cannot know when, or perhaps even if, this convergence will produce a conflagration. Mass production and “scientific management” took shape almost two decades before the upsurge of the 1930s. The management offensive of the 1950s preceded the highly visible 1966 five-week strike of thirty thousand airline mechanics that halted 60 percent of the nation’s air traffic and announced the era of rank-and-file rebellion that would accelerate in the early 1970s. The “accumulations of inflammable materials” that underlay these waves of strikes and union growth had to become generalized and widely experienced before an “explosion” was likely. Although we can see plenty of signs of resistance and the feelings of “injustice” that mobilization theory tells us precedes any upsurge, it is impossible to fully gauge the subjective factor needed to set things in motion. And, of course, there are other intervening social, economic, and political conditions that can suppress militancy and rebellion for a time. Predictions of an upsurge are almost always a futile pursuit, as Kelly’s suggestion that in the late 1990s labor was “likely to be on the threshold of resurgence” reminds us. What is needed now is not crystal ball gazing but preparation.  
>

> The strength, durability, and outcomes of these periodic upsurges depend to a large degree on the formation and development of the activist layer of the labor movement. It is this layer that not only supports the unions during good times and bad but also plays a key role in the upsurge. To the degree that there is a core within the activist layer that is class conscious and politically aware, the activist layer is strengthened and the force of the upsurge and, hence, its outcomes stronger and more durable. Labor historian David Montgomery noted the importance of this active core of the class in understanding the course of class struggle. He wrote, “Both ‘history from the bottom up’ and the common fixation on great leaders have obscured the decisive role of those whom twentieth-century syndicalists called the ‘militant minority’: the men and women who endeavoured to weld their workmates and neighbours into a self-aware working class.” The socialist and syndicalist leaders of the shop stewards’ movement in Britain or the revolutionary shop stewards in Germany during and after the First World War mentioned above are examples of this.  
>
> Such a layer existed in the US working class in the early 1930s that made the upheaval that produced the industrial unions of the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) both powerful and durable. These were mostly radicals, members of the Socialist Party, Communist Party, Trotskyists, Musteites, and veterans of the IWW (the Industrial Workers of the World). The activists from these and similar groups organized the first major strikes in 1933 and on a grander scale in 1934 with the strikes of Toledo auto parts workers, Minneapolis Teamsters, and San Francisco longshore workers. They played a central role in crucial actions such as the sit-down strike at General Motors in Flint, Michigan, in 1937. Their understanding of capitalism and their organizational know-how helped launch this upsurge despite the fact that they also often fought each other. It was these working-class radicals that formed the backbone of the new stewards’ organizations at the heart of industry, provided information and analysis within and across union lines, and, when necessary forced upon often reluctant officials both elements of democracy and the broader mobilizations that gave the CIO upsurge its power and durability.  
>

> The new and emerging shape of capitalism offers opportunities, not certainties. It does, however, point to some broad strategic directions and possibilities. There are three dimensions that offer some promise: the larger size of national or regional corporations in many industries; the huge concentrations of workers, particularly Blacks and Latinos, in urban areas; and the fragility of the whole just-in-time logistics supply chain system. In most of the industries described above, one or more unions already have a foothold. Worker-to-worker organizing in those industries along the lines of the national corporations or chains can use the stronger union presence in urban concentrations much like Farrell Dobbs’s approach to organizing midwestern truckers and dockworkers in the 1930s. Then Dobbs and the Teamsters used truckers in the urban union stronghold of Minneapolis to “reach outward” to over-the-road truckers, warehouse workers, and local drivers in the Midwest. Today this can mean using the urban base to reach out to the adjacent huge logistics clusters and manufacturing “out on the interstate” as well as local services.  
>

> The other side of this tarnished coin is the fact that the Democrats long ago abandoned the “lunch pail” politics and whatever slight policy preferences for working-class people or unions they once had, embracing free trade, cutting aid to the cities, as we will see below, and putting the unions at arms’ length insofar as legislation was concerned. It is important to understand that the Democratic Party, with rare personal exceptions, turned its back on the entire working class, not just the white industrial workers in the Rust Belt who got so much media attention in 2016. The difference, of course, is that African Americans and Latinos, much less immigrants, were significantly less susceptible to Republican appeals to racial prejudice and/or nostalgia for a real or imagined more prosperous or ethnically homogeneous past. Instead, perhaps uninspired, African Americans, Latinos, and the young stayed home in greater numbers than expected.  
>

> It should be fairly obvious that the rhythms of profitability, recurring crises, facility relocations, and subsequent decline in and restructuring of manufacturing would produce both an economic impact on the state and an accelerated political intervention from capital and its representatives in government. Yet the role of the state in capitalism is necessarily a contradictory one. For capital, it is, on the one hand, a necessity for social order, the protection of private property and accumulation, defense in a competitive and violent world, negotiator of the terms of globalization, instrument of imperial expansion, and subsidizer, and, on the other hand, it is ultimately a drain on surplus value via taxation even if much of this comes from the wages of workers. The whole program of neoliberalism, of course, is meant to resolve this seeming conflict by redistributing the costs of the state from capital to the middle and working classes by tax reductions on business and the wealthy, shifting the burden downward and increasing the flow of the nation’s surplus value to capital.  
>
> Things are rendered even more complicated by the multilayered nature of the American state, with its federal government, 50 states, 3,000 counties, nearly 20,000 municipalities, and 16,500 townships. No level of government, however, has been exempt from the attack on the state as a cost to capital or perceived barrier to accumulation that has characterized the neoliberal era. In fact, this plethora of governments has become a source of massive tax relief and government subsidy for corporate America. As location, relocation, and outsourcing became means of escaping unions and lowering labor costs in the era of lean production, corporations played one city, county, or state against others in order to receive the tax breaks, subsidies, land deals, and other incentives that looted the public treasury in return for the promise, not always fulfilled, of jobs.  
>

> At the level of the federal government, capital’s political effort to reshape the function of the national state from its Keynesian regulatory operation to what became its neoliberal direction goes back to the 1970s and the work of the Business Roundtable and others in formulating and lobbying for the neoliberal agenda. To a considerable extent during the Reagan years and followed in the 1990s by Clinton’s ending of “welfare as we know it” and his declaration that “the age of big government is over,” the federal government increasingly got out of or deemphasized the business of social support as much as was feasible while still maintaining social order—this latter goal being accomplished by the increasing militarization of the police and the expansion of the racialized “carceral state.”  
>

> If anything, it seems that in the United States the state as a whole has become less relatively autonomous from capital. This is not only because of the vast and increasing amounts of money that pour into the election campaigns and infrastructure of both parties at all levels of the political system, and the legions of corporate and right-wing lobbyists that infest Congress and state legislatures. As a result of the removal of more and more barriers to and imposed costs upon capital, it has accrued the freedom to move, merge, and mutate into today’s new giants of accumulation, many of which are global actors as well. These giants *are* “the economy” and as such have both explicit and implicit power and influence over politicians, who accept the rules of the game (domestic and global), as well as over the state they administer. Arthur Lipow explained this well when he wrote: “When the representatives of the big national corporations speak they are listened to because they do so in the name of jobs and the health of the economy, with the premise, stated or not, that what is good for their company or industry is good for the economy or the nation. This is a powerful argument, and it is one which the legislators and the executive basically accept because they genuinely agree with it.”27 As Engels put it in the simplest of terms, “the economic movement gets its way,” particularly when those in charge act as its willing, if sometimes unconscious, servants. The role of wealth and the wealthy, especially the activists of the capitalist class, in the operations of mainstream electoral and legislative politics has become far more visible, as has the staggering inequality they are defending and advancing.  
>

> Modern liberalism, after all, was and is a class ideology that accepts the most basic premises of capitalism concerning private property and the market— albeit with some limitations and, when necessary, reforms. While it proposes social reforms, such as the New Deal or the Great Society, in line with its acceptance of private property and the market, its goals are almost always limited to “equality of opportunity” rather than equality of results. This ideology and its various versions, along with the party’s more conservative political tendencies, is one aspect of what makes the Democratic Party a capitalist party. Post-World War II liberalism, although embraced by much of the union leadership, was mostly a middle-class phenomenon, which meant it lacked the potential social, occupational, or economic cohesion of either capital or the organized working class. As a political current it never challenged the corporate or private form of property in the means of production, while it rapidly abandoned such New Deal–expanding programs as a national health care system by the early 1950s.  
>

> As Thomas Byrne Edsall described this turn, “During the 1970s, business refined its ability to act as a class, submerging competitive instincts in favour of joint, cooperative action in the legislative arena.” The leader of this crusade was the Business Roundtable, founded in 1973 and representing most of the major industrial, commercial, and financial corporations in the United States, and whose connections with the Carter administration were direct. The roundtable developed the roster of deregulation, tax reductions, welfare cuts, privatization, and so on that have been the neoliberal agenda up to this day. It was soon followed in its activist course by the broader US Chamber of Commerce and the National Association of Manufacturers. The Trilateral Commission, also founded in 1973 by top business leaders, refined the international free trade dimension of the developing neoliberal agenda—with connections to the Carter White House and other Democrats. At the same time, post-Watergate reforms opened the door to corporate PACs, which proliferated from 89 in 1974 to 784 in 1978 and 1,467 in 1982. Corporate and trade association PAC campaign contributions rose from a mere $8 million in 1972 to $84.9 million in 1982, much of it going to the new generation of Democrats mentioned above as well as to Democratic incumbents.  
>
> In the 1980s, partly as a response to Reagan’s election, the party took a further step toward neoliberalism when Charles Manatt, a lawyer and banker from California, became chair of the Democratic National Committee (DNC). As Ferguson and Rogers succinctly describe his role, “Manatt swiftly embarked on a sweeping reorganization of the party,” sprucing up its direct mail and computer operations and orienting party organizations toward even greater dependence on business money. Manatt, for example, was instrumental in founding the Democratic Business Council, which was specifically organized to “reform the party’s finances” and grant business leaders direct access to “task forces and study groups to develop party policies.” As the deep recession of 1980–83 disillusioned some business leaders with the Reagan administration, and the Democrats did well in congressional elections, Manatt sponsored a series of dinners and meetings with top business leaders to swing them, or at least their money, to the Democrats. In 1981 the DNC-appointed Hunt Commission was set up to rationalize the presidential nomination system. Its main “reforms” were the establishment of the notorious “super delegates” and the frontloading of the primary season “designed to advantage the early front-running candidates and ensure that party insiders would be ‘heard’ at the convention.” And that was only the beginning.  
>

> While for obvious reasons few on the left today advocate realignment per se, many still argue that the Democratic Party can be “moved” to the left by working in it to elect progressive candidates at various levels—or at the very least that it can serve as a platform for a future split to the left. It is not really a “party” at all, goes the argument, in that it is not a membership organization like Canada’s New Democratic Party or the British Labour Party. Rather it is just a collection of shifting electoral coalitions. Elections these days are “candidate-centered,” meaning the candidates run and shape their own campaigns, as any number of political science books will tell you. Anyone can run for office on the party’s state-mandated primary ballot line, and there is little discipline in its legislative or congressional bodies to prevent one from advocating for change and voting one’s conscience, and so on. It is permeable.  
>
> To some extent, of course, the Democratic Party is permeable. It could not play its role in the great American Scheme if it weren’t. It is precisely its ability to attract and absorb the leaders and activists of social movements and organized labor that makes it, as some of us still insist, “the graveyard of social movements.” When positive changes came, as argued above and again below, it was due to mass social upheaval. The absorption into Democratic Party politics came mostly as the movements’ leaders sought gains through the traditional political process—even if sometimes in nontraditional ways, like via the Rainbow Coalition. The party they attempted to influence, however, never fulfilled the demands or hopes of the movement leaders and activists it absorbed. From the populists to the CIO to the civil rights movement this “non-party” succeeded in incorporating such leaders and activists—sometimes including token representation on the Democratic National Committee. While the upheavals brought some reforms, and the incorporated leaders were cheered for such achievements, their absorption was accompanied by the increasing move to the center-right.  
>
> For organized blocs involved in trying to influence this “party of the people” from within, politics are reduced to pressure tactics. For organized labor, in particular, attempts to influence the policies and practices of elected Democratic officials are reduced to financial donations (which often pale in comparison to those from capital), endorsements, and get-out-the-vote efforts on behalf of favored individual candidates. This is followed by lobbying in hopes of getting them to actually support labor’s goals—mostly directed from the top of the unions. The process is, in practice, analogous to the collective bargaining with which these leaders are familiar. It involves negotiation, occasional temporary mobilization, and compromise. The difference is that in collective bargaining, the mobilization phase can involve the withdrawal of labor, which can temporarily cripple the employer. There is no such force available in conventional politics other than the idle threat to withdraw labor’s votes. All of this contrasts sharply with the older practice of labor seeking direct representation through its own party, something, with the brief and partial exception of the Labor Party in the late 1990s (see below), US labor has not attempted for generations, but which socialists might want to put back on the agenda.  
>

> Such a perspective shares with the idea of building a new working-class-based party the perception that the Democratic Party as an institution, along with most of its elected officials, is out of step with the anger and political preferences of its major voting blocs—mainly African Americans, Latinos, and working-class people in general as well as a large percentage of young people of both middle- and working-class origin. This, of course, is absolutely true. But even if we assume this political dissonance is as strong or stronger than it was at previous times, such as the civil rights era, there is a good deal of truth in what Paul Heideman writes in Jacobin: “The contradiction between the party’s base and its investors has existed since the birth of the modern Democratic Party in the New Deal. It has persisted through the Great Society, through the New Politics era, through Carter, all the way up until the present. Again and again, this contradiction alone has proven inert, unable to change the basic structure of power within the party.”  
>
> It is not that people are inert but that the contradiction itself is because even in periods of social upheaval there is essentially no way for the mass of Democratic voters to impact the party’s undemocratic multilayered structure, including its sitting office holders once elected. Trying to make the voices of the unrepresented voters heard by becoming an office holder means overcoming party opposition in the individualized and costly process of the primary, defeating an incumbent in either the primary or general election, attempting to act as a lone or minority force for change once elected by resisting party leaders and discipline, and then getting reelected. All these barriers to making any difference in this rigged setup explain why it never happens, even though many have tried over the decades. Nothing is changed. There is no new democratic political organization among angry working-class voters. The contradiction remains inert. The polarized two-party American Scheme with its “lesser-evil” cul-de-sac means that the disaffected Democrat has no place to go other than the “greater evil” or a faux-populist like Trump, which some have done, or possibly a protest vote for a minor party such as the Greens, precisely because there is no mass alternative. And there is no mass alternative, for one thing, because generations of union officials and activists, civil rights leaders, environmentalists, community organizers, and socialists have squandered their efforts in attempting to realign, reform, and pressure this business-friendly conglomerate behemoth to little effect.  
>

> Perhaps then it would be a new wave of leftists and socialists getting elected to important offices, which appears to be at least one part of the strategy of both DSA and Sanders’s post-election spinoff, Our Revolution. Given the reality of incumbency, high cost, and, no doubt, bitter resistance from the entire Democratic apparatus, this appears every bit as utopian as the formation of a third party that attempts to be a real national opposition by trying for the same high levels of political office—more on this below. In any case, there is no organization on the horizon with a significant enough social base to be such a center of gravity for a split from the Democrats. Without one, the split perspective lacks credibility. What there is at the moment is an organization dedicated to pointing the forces that made the Sanders campaign the unique political event it was into the Democratic Party—it is called Our Revolution.  
>

> More importantly, is the addition of yet one more big Democratic fund-raising operation, let alone one that can raise and channel “dark funds,” really what is needed to carry out a “political revolution”? Did Bernie or anyone really think another state-sanctioned and limited bureaucratic fundraising apparatus would energize and mobilize the millions of Sandernistas who made the first foray into a new politics possible? Wouldn’t a democratic grassroots organization able to run independent candidates be more to the point?  
>
> One “post-Sanders” perspective that appears to be related to the hopes of Our Revolution is to storm the Democratic Party at the precinct- and district-level organizations and primaries in the hopes of gaining office or influence by virtue of sheer numbers. In addition to the facts of incumbency, money, professional and purchased campaign tactics, experience in repelling primary challengers, and prior organization that await such an invasion, there is the additional countervailing fact that those attempting to work at the precinct or district level of the party to elect a left candidate in the primary will be expected to work for the winner, who more often than not, will be the incumbent they tried to defeat. In fact, party activists who plan to stay for any time, of course, will also be expected to work for the entire ticket. Most of these candidates will be the very upholders of the neoliberal or centrist status quo the rebels hoped to dislodge. In this way, the would-be rebels will end up reinforcing the status quo they sought to challenge. Anyone who thinks this party, including its apparatchiks, organizations, and office holders, is up for grabs, on its way to becoming an American social democracy, or on the verge of a split needs to look again.  
>
> Overall, the prospects for reforming or splitting from a Democratic Party in serious retreat as the basis for the formation of a truly progressive breakthrough in US politics seem hopeless and the efforts to achieve it pointless or worse — a squandering of the potential of the Sanders challenge.  
>

> If this activity is to be politicized, there must be political organization already on the ground. That is the purpose of emphasizing local independent political action and democratic organization. So, once again, the idea of a breakthrough in politics—as in unionization and workplace organization in the nation’s cities via a social upsurge—is not a reason to wait but rather to prepare and organize as the few examples of local independent political action offered earlier are at least partially doing. Thus, social movements on the ground and new organizing in the nation’s changing workplaces and logistics networks are not something merely “economic” as opposed to “political” but part and parcel of an overall strategy for laying the basis of greater changes to come. Without social upsurge in the cities there can be no electoral breakthrough; without democratic political organization on the ground the next upheaval can be drawn back into that “graveyard of social movements,” the Democratic Party.  
>

> The art of working-class advance on this new terrain of class struggle will depend on combining and integrating the unionizing potential of the new configuration of capital with its increased vulnerabilities, on the one hand, and organized, urban-based, mass working-class and social movement activism and grassroots, independent political action, beginning locally and building upward, on the other.  
>
> There is no inevitability that organized labor or the working class in general will take advantage of this new landscape. Indeed, the danger of the continuing appeal of a Trump-like figure or politics to sections of the working class remains real. Much depends on the sort of upsurge that cannot be willed or predicted. As argued in chapter 6, the British labor historian Eric Hobsbawm showed that the growth of unions and other social movements cannot be measured by “a mere rising slope.” Rather these gains come in “leaps” or “explosions” that sweep into labor’s ranks the previously unorganized, including many once conservative or racist workers. While old forms of prejudice and social conservatism do not necessarily disappear automatically, such class “explosions” tend to be transformative in terms of both action and consciousness. The underlying causes of these “leaps” in labor movement growth are not so much economic cycles as “accumulations of inflammable material which only ignite periodically, as it were under compression.”1 “Compression” seems like an apt description of the conditions of the working class in the United States and much of the world today. There are, indeed, massive pressures on more and more working-class people and even middle-class professionals, providing the fuel for a conflagration that awaits a spark or sparks from places no one can foresee.  
>
> The task now is not to sit around waiting for an upsurge, much less hoping the Democrats will ride in to the rescue, but to begin building democratic, grassroots organizations, structures, networks, movements, and actions that can hasten and strengthen any social explosion that lies ahead and attract those working-class elements currently drawn to right-wing “populism.” Many are already doing this; more need to join in. No doubt more research into the contours of capital I have The task now is not to sit around waiting for an upsurge, much less hoping the Democrats will ride in to the rescue, but to begin building democratic, grassroots organizations, structures, networks, movements, and actions that can hasten and strengthen any social explosion that lies ahead and attract those working-class elements currently drawn to right-wing “populism.” Many are already doing this; more need to join in. No doubt more research into the contours of capital I have analyzed above will be needed to map strategies and tactics that can take full advantage of the situation that has emerged and is still taking shape. In the final analysis, however, it will be the actions of those on the ground that will open up new possibilities.  
>

> There will be resistance. Rather, there already is increased resistance. And this will offer new possibilities for organizing, even in a more hostile atmosphere. At the same time, many, including not a few on the socialist left, will run for cover in the Democratic Party’s “Big Tent,” arguing that now is not the time to take on the Democrats, that the great task is to elect a Democratic Congress, any Democratic Congress, in 2018 to rein in Trump just as the Republicans blocked Obama after 2010, and so on. It will not even be an argument for reforming the party, just stopping the Trump rampage—although there are already many arguing this party can be pushed to the left by running for office, à la Our Revolution. It will be a tempting and effective argument, particularly if Trump has, indeed, pulled out all the stops or hasn’t already appointed someone to the Supreme Court. But such a political direction will only reinforce the Democrats’ neoliberalism, digital dependency, and failed strategies.  
>
> We had better bear in mind what this approach has not done for the past four decades and will not do in the coming years. It will not increase voter turnout for working-class people, especially African American and Latino voters. The rate of voter turnout has fallen for the past few decades, particularly for off-year congressional elections. Both Black and Latino rates of voter participation in off-year elections, long below average, have nose-dived since 2010 and did not recover in 2016 despite the threat of a Trump victory. Nor will the off-the-rack centrist liberalism, much less neoliberalism, of the vast majority of Democratic incumbents and most likely candidates win back those white working-class people or those in union households who have been voting Republican for decades or the recent angry Trump converts. Politics as usual have failed.  
>
> They have failed not only in the United States but also across the West, where right-wing “populism” has captured the anger of many working-class as well as petit bourgeois and middle-class people over the impact of neoliberalism, globalization, and capital’s periodic crises. The “other” victims of capital’s imperial wars and mass economic dispossessions have been made the target of the anger of those who have faced the steamroller of austerity, restructured industries, and “left behind” communities at home. The centrist liberalism and social democracy that participated in both sides of these mass dislocations and deprivations have beaten a hasty retreat where they have not collapsed altogether. There has been a rebellion from the left in Europe, but it has yet to capture or inspire sufficient roots in the working class to defeat the Right. Its overemphasis on electoralism limits this Left’s powers of mobilization and grassroots organization. Rather than engaging in political work within the trade unions, the leaders of these new left parties sometimes write them off as simply part of the dying social democracy. None of this is inevitable in Europe or elsewhere.  
>

> In the United States, where there is no parliamentary opening via proportional representation or serial election rounds, the dimension of social organization is even more central to any perspective that hopes to create a viable political Left based in today’s diverse working class. As the analysis in chapters 3 through 6 strongly suggest, organized labor must be at the center of this perspective. Unions and workplace organization are not the only social forces that matter, even within the working class, but they have an immediate source of power most other movements don’t in their underutilized ability to halt production—an ability that has been magnified by the “logistics revolution.” And they remain the largest organized potential social force for change. Much in the unfolding organization of capitalism in the United States offers opportunities for unions to organize, grow, deepen their urban roots, and expand geographically if they offer the means to fight effectively to the new underpaid, overworked labor force and take advantage of the vulnerabilities inherent in capital’s new integrated and largely landlocked terrain. This will certainly require the transformation of most unions through rank-and-file organization that rejects bureaucratic business unionism of the sort we have seen in several national unions and many more local unions in recent years. The influx into organized labor of workers in the nation’s growing number and concentrations of low-wage, intensified jobs will add to this dynamic.  
>
> On the basis of such a dynamic, political work at the local level can begin to build the base for a genuine transformation in party politics through a new political formation. The center is in retreat everywhere. The fight against the Right, Trump, and the policies they attempt to implement can be the training ground for an expanded layer of activists and the growth of a militant minority that takes the struggle beyond “politics as usual” and the neoliberalism that has become hated by millions who, nevertheless, see no progressive force or way to resist and overcome it. Capital’s new terrain of class war is a treacherous one, but it is also one of new possibilities to build such an alternative.  
>
