# Revolution in the Air by Max Elbaum #
> Much of the young movement’s practical organizing and propaganda work was afflicted by a counterproductive ultraleft tilt. Imperialism was almost always described as being “in crisis.” Despite general calls for an anti-imperialist united front, exposing what were considered reformist illusions (and those figures who allegedly spread them) almost always received priority over establishing durable relationships with reform-minded leaders. Setting up small, politically pure “mass organizations” under antirevisionist control was almost always preferred over long-term base building and contention for influence within actually existing mass organizations. (While able to produce some short-term results, this proved an ultimately disastrous policy, contributing substantially to the isolation of the Marxist-Leninists as US politics in the 1970s shifted rightwards.) Militant rhetoric was regarded as a necessary staple of mass agitation, and a general spirit of “looking over your left shoulder” – to make sure positions could not be criticized as insufficiently revolutionary – infused much of the groups’ political work.  
>

> This back-to-the-mainstream motion was still in its early stages in 1972–73. But from its inception it posed significant strategic and tactical challenges to the revolutionary left. As reform politics regained initiative and possibilities arose for progressives to win public office, it was inevitable that masses of people would support efforts to utilize these openings to try to attain their goals. In these circumstances, it was inevitable that skillful procapitalist figures would try to position themselves as leaders trying to change the system from within, attracting many who had labored in grassroots movements during headier times.  
>
> What did these new dynamics mean for revolutionaries? Precedents existed for a range of responses. One alternative was to jump into the midst of this reform motion and fight for left influence within it. Another was to denounce those who pursued electoral office or other reformist goals as succumbing to establishment “co-optation” (to use the popular sixties pejorative term). A great deal depended on the revolutionaries’ assessment of capitalism’s near-term prospects. If the system was in precarious shape – facing big economic shocks, international defeats, and so on; and if millions of workers were just a jolt away from moving rapidly to the left – then reformist efforts were likely to be fragile and short-lived, giving way rapidly to another round of mass upheaval. But if Washington was able to cut its losses in Southeast Asia, limit strain on the economy and recapture the allegiance of discontented strata; and if a mass-based conservative revival was taking shape that would exert a huge rightward pull, especially on trade union officialdom, millions of suburban-dwelling white workers, and former students who were entering the professional strata – then there were stronger arguments for trying to establish a left pole within more traditional forms or at least straining every nerve to try to forge the broadest possible alliances on a minimal program of mass action against reaction. Under those circumstances, focusing solely on building explicitly left-led organizations and agitation for revolution would inevitably relegate anticapitalists to the margins.  
>

> For one thing – official proclamations notwithstanding – Mao Zedong Thought was not a consistent doctrine. It contained different and only superficially compatible elements, and in fact was an amalgam of perspectives associated with different factions within the Chinese Communist Party. One tendency stuck closest to the orthodoxy of Marxism-Leninism as developed under Stalin; this was the dominant framework in the antirevisionist polemics of the early 1960s. A second thread gave far more weight to Third World nationalism than classical Stalinism had done, and also tended toward populism in constantly emphasizing the people rather than the working class. Lin Biao’s *Long Live the Victory of People’s War*, which put forward a strategy of the countryside of the world surrounding the cities, most reflected this tendency. Finally there was Cultural Revolution Maoism, with its emphasis on a constantly aroused populace “bombarding the headquarters” and creating socialism through ideological enthusiasm regardless of the level of technology, industry and science, and without state institutions where workers could elect (and recall) their leaders. Infused with voluntarism – the view that human will can change history regardless of objective conditions – this view bordered on anarchism. Inspiring as it was to young radicals worldwide, it was more distant from classical Marxism than any other tendency in the CPC.  
>
> Translating these threads into a perspective for US revolutionaries made for a complicated mix. On the one hand, it was the Cultural Revolution and Lin Biao–style support for Third World liberation that first attracted US radicals to China’s banner. But in trying to turn this attraction into a concrete program, these same activists were inexorably drawn to the more comprehensive (and more Stalinist) antirevisionist polemics. At the beginning of the 1970s most cadre believed that all these threads constituted a coherent whole. But in China, the authors of the antirevisionist polemics had been denounced and ousted from power as opponents of the Cultural Revolution.18 And Lin Biao fell from power (and died in a suspicious plane crash while fleeing China) in 1971 as the CPC leadership prepared to host Richard Nixon and begin its rapprochement with Washington. It was only a matter of time before conflicts along similar ideological lines broke into the open among US Maoists.  
>

> Even if the CPC had acted differently, unity imposed from outside could only have been artificial and temporary. Far more decisive in determining the movement’s future was the fact that it lacked a firm, institutional anchor within a class or substantial class fraction inside the United States. The 1960s upheavals had weakened the traditional structures that exercised authority within the working class – unions, urban Democratic Party machines, conservative churches. But radical movements had not succeeded in taking over these institutions or creating alternatives that involved hundreds of thousands of workers. The new generation of radical youth – including those who came from working class and/or oppressed minority backgrounds – were rebelling against the dominant institutions in their communities as frequently as they brought the social bases of those institutions with them. As these young activists adopted Marxism they set the goal of sinking roots in the working class. But they were not embarking on this project with the extensive class and community ties that characterize a more stable, cross-generational movement.  
>
> Furthermore, despite the turmoil of the times, no large and cohesive section of the working class turned leftwards as a united social force. Individuals from crucial strata embraced radicalism, but not those strata as such. Students and youth brought energy and passion to the revitalized left. But they were an inherently transient layer destined to scatter across the class spectrum. Even the Black movement provided only a partial exception. The African American community – then unique among communities of color in size and nationwide distribution – was alive with social protest. But the Black freedom movement was a cross-class phenomenon. Only in the late 1960s did the specifically working class sectors of it develop independent radical vehicles and begin to act as an autonomous social force. Where this did occur – in Detroit more than anywhere else – it was possible to glimpse the potential power in a sustained interaction between revolutionary cadre and a coherent, in-motion social base. But this was too localized and fleeting a phenomenon to anchor a nationwide revolutionary trend.  
>
> And even one solid stratum could only be a starting point. The US is a huge country with an extremely complex social structure and a deeply fragmented working class. It would take a large, strategically located and politically active sector – maybe more than one sector – to provide a sufficient anchor for the development of a durable revolutionary movement. Three decades earlier the huge upsurge of workers employed in mass production had provided that kind of base for the development of the CPUSA. When such a powerful section of the working class takes the stage it provides revolutionary activists with a reference point and reality check, an arena for large-scale organizing that not only develops their practical skills but provides strong incentive to maintain unity-in-action while debating differences. And the history of the left worldwide indicates that a large and active grassroots base is a powerful force for democratic practices within left organizations. (Of course, the work of revolutionaries often plays a role in laying the groundwork for mass upsurges. But the main factor is the way millions “spontaneously” respond to injustice and exploitation. Revolutionaries can sometimes shape the direction of mass movements, but they cannot create them on their own.)  
>

> On the plus side, movement cadre were immersed in a variety of vibrant social movements. They functioned within a large – if loose – revolutionary milieu, and felt themselves part of a rising worldwide revolutionary trend. All this gave them a running start. But the lack of a class anchor meant that there were only limited checks on the tendency of a youthful movement to try to force history to move faster through isolated acts of confrontation and other forms of ultraleftism; or the tendency of a movement disproportionately composed of individuals from the intelligentsia to lose its sense of proportion about theoretical differences and fall into self-destructive infighting. Likewise, the pressures from the broader society toward racial, sectoral and geographical fragmentation were not countered by sentiments bubbling up from a vigilant multiracial base; they had to be fought mainly via ideological and organizational means. And there is a long history of left parties that lack a solid class base at home becoming dependent on models (and franchises) from abroad.  
>
> The lack of a class anchor also contributed to the revolutionary left taking shape as a number of mutually hostile trends rather than a more cooperative alignment. Without minimizing the ideological and sociological differences between New Communist party builders, CPUSA supporters, revolutionary nationalists and others, the way their disagreements manifested themselves in bitter sectarian battles was at least partly framed by this problem. A more cohesive class base for the left, which in various ways would have held all radical forces accountable for advancing its interests, might have changed the equation, offering immediate negative consequences for unchecked intraleft conflict.  
>
> All this made for a set of delicate balances in the early New Communist Movement. Its young cadres’ intense commitment and energy drove the movement forward, but frequently hovered on the edge of counterproductive adventurism. Early debates over differences gave the movement an intellectually stimulating and democratic character, but too frequently broke down into point-scoring and name-calling. The movement drew strength from its identification with national liberation movements, but the temptation to import their strategies for use in the US threatened disaster.  
>

> Stalin also put his particular stamp on the vanguard party model. In keeping with the shift toward top-down control, he asserted in *The Foundations of Leninism* that the “party of Leninism” was the “embodiment of unity of will” requiring “iron discipline” and “ruthless struggle” against opportunist elements. By the end of the 1920s, the Communist International and its member parties functioned in ways that were quite different from Lenin’s time. Though formal rules permitted members to assert differing opinions, in practice any expression of dissent was stifled. Even in theory the ban on factions was no longer portrayed as an emergency measure but was promoted as a virtue – indeed, as indispensable for maintaining the revolutionary character of the party. The deliberations of leading bodies were kept secret from the membership and the leading committees presented a picture of unanimous agreement to the rank and file. Immense power became concentrated in one or a handful of leaders.  
>
> The Communist International (or Comintern) became completely dominated by the CPSU under Stalin. Officially sanctioned theory now emphasized the ironunity aspect of Bolshevism, not the development of a democratic political culture among comrades. The “one class, one party” view came back in a different form: loyalty to the working class was equated with loyalty to the revolutionary party, and differences with the party line were characterized as reflecting alien class influences. Those holding such differences were labeled as objectively (and sometimes consciously) agents of the enemy class. Increasingly, the measure of a party’s vanguard character was not its social base and influence within the revolutionary wing of the proletariat, but its allegiance to the so-called science of Marxism-Leninism and to the International.  
>
> Further, the one-party state was promoted as an indispensable aspect of socialism, with the “leading role” of the communist party enshrined in law. During and after the period of Stalin’s rule (he died in 1953), proponents of this model defended it as the embodiment of orthodox Marxism-Leninism, while left critics attacked it as a Stalinist distortion that turned Lenin’s ideas completely upside down. It should be noted that within large nonruling parties that had a substantial mass base – such as the Italian CP – the tendencies toward dogmatism and top-down dictate were muted. These parties’ interaction with an energized proletariat promoted more democratic and innovative practices, even if no theoretical declarations were issued challenging the Stalinist model. In practice there was considerable distance between the functioning of such parties and much smaller ones that lacked a substantial base and were never able to break out of a sectlike existence on the margins of their societies.  
>

> All this simply put more colorful, 1960s dressing on the perspective that had come to dominate the communist movement under Stalin. In some respects it even hardened that perspective further. The Cultural Revolution put front and center the idea that all differences of opinion within the party directly reflected differences in class outlook. This approach was crystallized in the thesis of two-line struggle. Narrowly speaking, this referred to the idea that a constant battle between proletarian and bourgeois lines raged within the party itself. More broadly, it meant a mandate for waging sharp struggle defending proletarian against bourgeois ideology in every area of life. In terms of inner-party debate, two-line struggle meant that there was a premium on identifying one viewpoint as a “bourgeois line” and its strongest supporters as a “bourgeois headquarters.” Those within that “headquarters” were subject to the charge of being on the capitalist road – objective representatives of the bourgeoisie who, if they persisted in their erroneous ways, could only become self-conscious agents of the enemy class – or, in countries where the communists held state power, a new bourgeoisie themselves.  
>
> While seeds of the two-line struggle framework can be found in Lenin, Maoism extended and changed Lenin’s ideas. Lenin did insist that in society there were only two basic outlooks – bourgeois and socialist – and that there could be no “above-class” ideology, but did not use the framework of “ideological struggle” to refer to inner-party debates, which he characterized as theoretical, political or tactical. Lenin was certainly given to sharp polemic, but until the emergency measures of 1921 he argued for giving them very free rein. Stalin’s codification of Leninism and his repressive practices marked a shift away from Lenin and popularized the idea that struggle against dissenters was a battle against enemy agents. But even Stalin’s conception of a monolithic party did not include the idea that the development of a bourgeois headquarters within it was inevitable. This was an innovation of Maoism – and it was one of the reasons orthodox Stalinists – such as the US Communist League – were suspicious of the Cultural Revolution and did not accept the idea of two-line struggle.  
>
> It is easy to see how the two-line struggle framework had a devastating effect on debate within the party. Differences of opinion tended to escalate rapidly into charges and counter-charges about one or another side representing the bourgeoisie. In theory, such charges could be leveled against those who held party leadership as well as against dissenters. But since in a centralized structure the leadership invariably holds the upper hand, the main effect was to reinforce ideological uniformity and chill dissent.  
>

> Movement cadre also had a self-confident, can-do attitude. Coming of age at a time when protests often doubled in size from one month to the next, they were accustomed to shaking up those in power and seeing the left grow. The downside of this quality was pervasive voluntarism. Generalizing from their 1960s experience, most cadre believed that that history always moved fast, and that they could make it move even faster with enough dedication and the right ideas.  
>
> The turn to Marxism-Leninism was supposed to replace New Left idealism with scientific materialism, but in many ways it simply reinforced the New Left’s voluntarism. The side of Marxism that emphasized socialism’s inevitable victory, and the aspect of Leninism that stressed the unique role of the vanguard, buttressed notions that this young movement could move mountains. Cultural Revolution Maoism – which viewed ideological transformation rather than economic development linked to the development of grassroots-empowering democratic institutions as the key to building socialism after the initial seizure of power – was especially compatible with idealist notions inherited from the New Left.  
>

> Through years of such attention to detail, movement groups trained some top-notch political tacticians – at least within the movement’s organizing model. That model placed great importance on convincing people to agree with a certain set of ideas and persuading them to join either a Marxist-Leninist group or a mass organization under its leadership. In other words, winning people’s allegiance to a particular line and organizational center were the key measures of success. Most of the movement gave little attention to – or actually opposed – the development of forms reflecting bottom-up initiative and working class self-organization outside party control.  
>
> Likewise, most groups attached little importance to development of grassroots leadership skills that were not linked to an immediate campaign. Tactics were oriented toward winning a particular reform or policy outcome and expanding the influence of the organization and its line. Alternatives stressing the long-term development of working class institutions and leaders that might or might not agree with the specific policy of a specific group at a specific time were not part of the movement’s vision.  
>

> The movement’s voting practices facilitated this negative phenomenon. While formally all groups adhered to the principle of majority rule, in practice there was a strong tendency to function on the basis of consensus. The positive side of this – prominent early on – was that important questions were given thorough discussion and members’ opinions were given a hearing. But over time the negatives predominated. There was tremendous pressure on everyone to agree; and members did not gain the experience of losing a vote one week, continuing to work harmoniously with their comrades, and being in the majority on some other issue the next week. It is through such experiences that activists learn to function on the basis of a genuine distinction between unity in action and unity of thought, and organizations develop the capacity to foster solidarity and trust among members who are not of one mind. When such experiences are short-circuited and these skills are not learned, organizations are prone to split the first time any serious internal disagreement comes up.  
>

> In the end, the combination of a culture infused with voluntarism and an organizational model based in top-down decision-making proved disastrous. But in delineating the flaws in the movement’s model, it would be a mistake to reject all of its component parts. Revolutionary spirit, hard work, personal sacrifice and the willingness to subordinate individual interests to the political tasks at hand are all crucial qualities for a successful radical movement. So too is the commitment to sink roots among the exploited and oppressed and to struggle within the movement over inequalities of class, race and gender. And – whether or not they are now in fashion – so are organizations capable of functioning on the basis of well-worked out strategies, unity in action and a measure of collective discipline.  
>
> What’s more, such qualities – and attempts to build organizations which embody them – arise whenever large numbers of people mount a sustained challenge to the powers-that-be. Even in periods of political ebb there are pockets of activists who aspire to become revolutionary activists. Unless the upcoming decades are crisis- and conflict-free (an unlikely prospect), larger numbers are likely to take a similar course.  
>
> The New Communist Movement was born at a time when Marxism-Leninism was the world’s dominant revolutionary pole, so it turned to a version of Leninist democratic centralism to channel its dedication and energy. In the short term it achieved remarkable results in stimulating cadre to study and organize; in providing recruits with many new skills; in building solidarity among activists across class, racial and gender lines; and in building organizations able to exert influence far beyond their numbers. The fact that no movement organization could sustain such positive features over the long haul indicates that a better way of political organization than Stalinist hierarchy needs to be found. But the underlying project – cohering revolutionary-minded activists into a collective body of cadre – remains a crucial task for constructing any effective left.  
>

> But the particular way most antirevisionists condemned RU pushed in a different direction. Rather than foster a willingness to look beyond the boundaries of traditional doctrine, it called upon Marxist-Leninists to embrace more firmly a position formulated forty-plus years before. And pressures toward dogmatism were not limited to this issue. Through 1974 and 1975 a mounting chorus argued that classical doctrine contained the answers to all questions, from how to analyze 1970s trade unions to understanding the evolution and current nature of the USSR. The voices arguing this outlook overwhelmed all others, and the dogmatic tendencies that had been present in the New Communist Movement from the beginning assumed hegemonic force. Worship of the classics became not just frequent but the norm. Intellectual censorship and self-censorship took hold, with most groups coming to see dangers of “American exceptionalism” (the idea that Marxism-Leninism didn’t apply to the US) in virtually any fresh historical or social analysis of US society. From this point on, original theoretical production within the mainstream of the New Communist Movement all but dried up, and only a few dissident strands (about which more later) even attempted to do more than take positions that could be easily justified via quotations from the Leninist classics (or the current positions of the Communist Party of China).  
>

> Within this swing toward what might best be termed communist fundamentalism, the dominant critique of RU on party building had perhaps the most immediate negative effect. Critics claimed that the RU’s mistakes were due primarily to its pre-1974 view that building the mass movement rather than party building was the central task. RU’s initial view was attacked as being a rightist deviation that erroneously prioritized links with broad movements over ideological purification and propaganda efforts tailored to a small stratum of advanced workers. Polemics by the OL, WVO, CL, BWC, IWK and PRRWO as well as a short book by New Voice leader Charles Loren all sounded variations on this theme.20 They argued that immunity from the infection that supposedly corrupted RU would be gained primarily by studying the communist classics, and some of RU’s critics argued that rooting out errors like those of the RU required giving top priority to studying the theory of party building itself.  
>
> Conditions outside the movement also facilitated this retreat into purist orthodoxies. By 1974–75 the popular movements, which had surged in 1970–73, had ebbed like their late-sixties predecessors, leaving the entire revolutionary left adrift. Conceptions of a large and flexible organization, informed by Marxist theory but deriving its vitality from week-to-week interaction with a dynamic layer of class-conscious workers, began to appear more and more abstract. In that context, theories promoted by earlier communist generations – and the prestige of parties in other countries – began to carry even more weight. This was hardly the first time in communist history that narrowing opportunities for political advance had led to theoretical and strategic rigidity rather than readjustment and creativity. The side of Lenin that insisted upon breadth of vision (“politics begin where millions of men and women are; where there are not thousands, but millions”) and tremendous political flexibility (what Eric Hobsbawm called Lenin’s “habitual realism”) was buried under endless quotations demanding doctrinal purity and iron discipline. The idea that demarcations between reformists and revolutionaries were necessary over *decisive questions facing broad masses* was constricted into a sectarian mandate to split over shades of doctrine important at most to a few thousand people. The proposition that the purpose of embracing revolutionary theory was to guide an organization toward *earning* a vanguard role was increasingly obscured. Instead, most groups began to act as if adopting a certain set of principles meant being anointed by history or given the franchise as the proletarian vanguard.  
>
> The result was the rise to hegemony of a sort of Leninism in miniature. Leninist precepts were cited, but their meaning was drastically narrowed in scope and scale. Sixty-year-old polemics written as guidelines for a party of thousands to interact with a movement of millions were interpreted through the prism of how organizations of hundreds (or even dozens) should interact with movements of thousands (or less). The tendency toward mechanical formulas and organizational narrow-mindedness went from having a certain influence to becoming deeply entrenched. The movement’s vision of a vanguard party was reduced to the model of a sect. Just when a dose of fresh thinking was needed to transcend the limits of the Stalin-Mao model and expand on the valuable insights in Lenin’s thought, the movement’s strongest groups headed in the exact opposite direction. Miniaturized Leninism was Leninist in form, but sterile in content.  
>

> Additionally, encompassing big capital and the New Right but extending far beyond them, a wide swath of the propertied layers of US society were mobilizing behind what amounted to “a broadly embracing ‘Have’ politics.” Expressions of this rising coalition included “the rolling earthquake of suburban protests after 1976, including the anti-busing movements, campaigns for a return to educational ‘basics,’ landlord and realtor mobilizations (truly massive, with hundreds of thousands of ardent members organized against rent control and public housing), and, most importantly, what the Los Angeles Herald Tribune once called the ‘Watts Riot of the Middle Classes’ – [California’s property tax–cutting] Proposition 13 and its spinoff tax revolts, which forced nineteen states to enact legislative or constitutional limits on property or income taxes.” Still holding a tremendous grip on US politics today, the alignment of “Have” sectors formed under such banners was a defining factor in shaping the dynamics of the late 1970s and then bringing Reagan to power.  
>

> So the main party building groups held themselves together, and new Marxist-Leninist collectives continued to form. Some lasted only a year or two before affiliating with one of the national organizations or breaking apart; others – like a particularly sophisticated small circle in northern New Jersey – spent many years building a local base of some size (in this case through the People’s Independent Coalition) before fading away. The sheer proliferation of organizations – fundamentally a symptom of weakness – ironically lent the movement a certain energy. A picture of just how mazelike the organizational map had become was drawn in 1977 when the tiny Communist Workers Group published a 17-by-22-inch family tree of the existing antirevisionist organizations together with each group’s genealogy and its relationship with allies and rivals.1 The diagram – which quickly became known as The Chart – listed some thirty-five organizations, but more striking than even their sheer number was the fact that organizational splits and broken alliances far exceeded the number of mergers. Confirming the old saying that one picture is worth a thousand words, The Chart illustrated more vividly than any polemic just how much trouble the movement was in.  
>
> But most cadre could did not see the forest for the trees, and many spent hours poring over The Chart in fascination at their movement’s convoluted history. Indeed, one of the key facts revealed by this diagram was that as of 1977, not a single group formed on the basis of antirevisionism had yet publicly challenged any of the essentials of Marxism-Leninism. Neither had any organization simply dissolved because its members could not agree on a direction for party building.  
>

> Also eroding the CP(ML)’s stability was an increasingly out-of-touch stance on domestic issues. Behind the CP(ML)’s turnabout regarding reform unionists like Sadlowski in the United Steel Workers was a more general ultraleft analysis. The CP(ML) declared that US liberalism was a more dangerous enemy than the right wing; that progressive reformers were only spreading illusions and must be the target of the “main blow”; and that workers were moving rapidly leftward and thousands were ready to join a communist organization.  
>
> All these assessments were wildly off-base: the center of gravity of US politics was moving sharply to the right, large numbers of white workers were turning rightward with it, and the poorer, more vulnerable and disproportionately people of color sectors had seen both their living standards and political strength eroded by the structural changes under way since 1973. Overall, the rightward shift was driven by an across-the-board counter-offensive stemming from the core of the ruling class, which aimed to reverse the setbacks it had suffered between the late 1960s and mid-1970s. Washington was marshaling its resources to roll back the gains of national liberation struggles, undermine the Non-Aligned Movement, regain a nuclear edge over the USSR and bolster its competitive economic position vis-à-vis Western Europe and Japan. At home, the goal was to impose a program of social austerity, take back the gains made peoples of color since the 1960s and weaken the trade union movement. To win popular support, big capital turned its ideologues loose to fan racism, raise the alarm about an alleged Soviet drive to conquer the world, and encourage the growth of a grassroots-based extreme right.  
>

> The Philadelphia Workers Organizing Committee had less visibility than the Guardian, but it did have the central ingredient that the paper lacked: a thought-through party building strategy. The PWOC argued that the key to forging a vanguard lay in a close connection between party building and mass working class organizing, and that fusing communism with the workers’ movement was “the essence” of the party-building process.22 The PWOC saw dogmatism in theory and ultraleft errors in policy to have been the main problems afflicting previous efforts. In response, the PWOC had developed “antidogmatist” positions on the special oppression of African Americans (the Black Nation no longer existed; Blacks were a national minority); trade union work (prioritizing long-term base building within existing unions), and international line (the USSR was socialist, though led by a revisionist party). The PWOC’s practical organizing was based on these views, and its patient, step-by-step approach had yielded results. The group’s cadre were active in several of Philadelphia’s most important unions and in many cases were central figures in militant rank-and-file caucuses, the most important of which was the Blue Ribbon Caucus in United Auto Workers Local 92 at the Budd Company’s Red Lion Plant. The PWOC’s newspaper, The Organizer – launched in 1975 and including a small section in Spanish – covered local labor and antiracist struggles in detail as well as featuring analytical pieces on national and international politics. All this made the PWOC a pole of attraction for activists from other cities who were breaking with ultraleftism. And the PWOC had specific advice to give them: it called for forming local collectives, linking these collectives together in an “ideological center” that would organize debate, publish a theoretical journal, set up a nationwide pre-party group and finally establishing a full-blown party.  
>

> In light of the mounting reactionary threat, it certainly behooved all left currents to figure out some constructive way to interact with these efforts. But what was striking about this flurry of liberal energy (which turned out to be very brief) was how it shifted the center of gravity of strategic thinking among socialists strongly to the right. Activists who just a few years earlier had criticized involvement in Democratic Party politics as a violation of principle now immersed themselves in that arena, and in many cases without much concern for how they might maintain a measure of independent radical initiative in the process.  
>
> Without doubt, a changed mood was evident among the layers of people who had at least loosely identified with radicalism at the end of the 1960s. On the plus side, most had developed a more realistic assessment of US politics and realized that revolutionary transformations were not on the horizon. But a sociological shift pushing many in a more conservative direction was also at work: many former New Leftists were now entering (or well into) their thirties and worrying more about career and family issues, a factor particularly strong among those who (unlike the majority of Marxist-Leninists) had gone into professional jobs and were beginning to climb the class ladder. The situation was complex: certainly a correction of ultraleft estimates of short-term political prospects was all to the good. But a lot more than that was being discarded as many activists “grew up.”  
>

> In the short run, Maoism gave a big forward push to many young revolutionaries’ enthusiasm. But by the mid-1970s its drawbacks had come to the fore. For starters, US Maoism’s support for China’s disastrous policy of alignment with the Washington took a terrible toll. Indeed, pioneer antirevisionist Harry Haywood eventually concluded that this factor lay at the heart of the movement’s demise:  
>
> "While many problems contributed to the crisis of the New Communist Movement, the underlying cause of its collapse was the incorrect strategic line of the Three Worlds Theory which our part of the party building movement uncritically adopted from the Chinese. This view that the Soviet Union is a social-imperialist country in which capitalism has been restored marked, for the Chinese, a fundamental change in the international balance of forces. It portrayed the Soviet Union not only as an enemy but the “main enemy” of the world’s people.… There was a logic inherent in the Three Worlds Theory which pushed it in the direction of class collaboration and an underestimation of US imperialism … [but] the belief that capitalism has been restored in the Soviet Union essentially comes from an idealistic concept of socialism.…"  
>
> Haywood’s indictment of the analytic errors and negative consequences of the Three Worlds theory is on the mark. But Maoism’s problems went even deeper, as recognized during the CP(ML)’s late-1970s crisis by one of China’s most prominent supporters from the mid-1970s, CP(ML) leader and Call Editor Dan Burstein:  
>
> "In the Chinese experience, we thought we found the answer.… The early ideas about what a party should be, how to make a revolution, how to look at philosophical and ideological questions, etc., were largely conditioned by the model offered by the Cultural Revolution.…  
>
> By probing a little more deeply into the way the line of the Cultural Revolution negatively influenced us, it is easier to see the whole system of ultraleft ideas and practice that often characterized our work.  
>
> There were ideas … that the history of any party is chiefly a history of two-line struggle; that there is a constant struggle between representatives of the bourgeoisie and the proletariat inside the party; that every single idea is stamped with a brand of a certain class. These concepts led us to an untenable situation in terms of being able to have real debate and democracy.…  
>
> Another premise of the Cultural Revolution … was the view that existing institutions and organizations were corrupt and reactionary almost across the board, and should be replaced wholesale by new “pure” proletarian ones.… [T]here is a close connection here to our zeal to set up new, independent organizations and movements … without much to back them up besides political line.…  
>
> The near-mystical qualities ascribed to Mao Zedong Thought by the Cultural Revolution contributed to our tendency to look on Marxism-Leninism more as a religion than a science.…  
>
> Maoism’s problems were crystallized in Mao’s Cultural Revolution slogan that “the correctness or incorrectness of the ideological and political line decides everything.” This dictum was cited endlessly by the main Maoist groups, despite the fact that it completely ignored material conditions and the balance of political forces, and was on its face a break from Marxist materialism. (Neither Marx nor Lenin, nor even Mao himself during the period when he was leading the armed struggle that resulted in the Chinese Revolution’s 1949 triumph, ever penned such an utterly idealist bromide.) As such, it not only fostered ultraleft analyses and tactics, but a theoretical purism that led directly to bitter confrontations over even minor points of doctrine and constant interorganizational competition."  
>
> Maoism’s problems were crystallized in Mao’s Cultural Revolution slogan that “the correctness or incorrectness of the ideological and political line decides everything.” This dictum was cited endlessly by the main Maoist groups, despite the fact that it completely ignored material conditions and the balance of political forces, and was on its face a break from Marxist materialism. (Neither Marx nor Lenin, nor even Mao himself during the period when he was leading the armed struggle that resulted in the Chinese Revolution’s 1949 triumph, ever penned such an utterly idealist bromide.) As such, it not only fostered ultraleft analyses and tactics, but a theoretical purism that led directly to bitter confrontations over even minor points of doctrine and constant interorganizational competition.  
>

> Though Cultural Revolution Maoism dominated the early New Communist Movement, there were also tendencies that were more comfortable with traditional Stalinism or the views of the Cuban Communists. And after the rupture over China’s foreign policy in the mid-1970s an entire trend tried to develop non-Maoist versions of antirevisionism. A few organizations looked to the post–Cultural Revolution CPC for inspiration.  
>
> To varying degrees, these tendencies avoided the worst of Maoist ultraleftism. But each alternative had grave problems of its own. Traditional Stalinism pushed in the direction of even greater dogmatism, rigidity and restrictions on democracy. Partisans of the post–Cultural Revolution CPC foundered on Beijing’s alignment with Washington and its steady abandonment of socialism in favor of integration into the world capitalist economy. Groups that tried to reinterpret the theoretical principles of the Cultural Revolution in a manner that was not ultraleft got caught in a morass of theoretical inconsistency. And although the Cuban Revolution – as well as the Vietnamese CP and African revolutionaries such as Amilcar Cabral – displayed great creativity and more consistent internationalism than either China or the USSR, they neither offered or claimed to offer a comprehensive framework for the international left.  
>
> And there was an even more fundamental problem. Advocates of all these perspectives accepted the notion that there was one and only one revolutionary tradition – and that there existed a single, genuine Marxism-Leninism that embodied its accumulated wisdom. They all believed that upholding their favored version of genuine Marxism-Leninism was the key to building a revolutionary movement. This established a never-ending quest for orthodoxy and a constant suspicion of heresy at the very center of the movement’s outlook.  
>
> But this entire framework (shared – though with different post-1917 icons – by pro-Soviet communism and Trotskyism) is fatally flawed. The conditions of economic, political and social life are so marked by constant change – and the history of popular and revolutionary movements is simply too complex – for there to be one pure tradition embodying all essential truths. A great deal can be learned from previous left experience, and identification with the history of the revolutionary movement can be a great source of strength. The contributions of Marx and Lenin still shed light on the workings of capitalism and the process of social change. They stand out for their breadth of vision and insistence on linking theory, practical work, and organization-building in an internationalist project. But it is an unwarranted leap from there to belief in a single and true Marxist-Leninist doctrine with an unbroken revolutionary pedigree from 1848 to the present.  
>
> This nevertheless was the mindset of the New Communist Movement, and it had profound and negative consequences. Even when activists learned through bitter experience that a particular system of orthodoxy was fundamentally flawed, impulses to break with dogmatism and explore new theoretical terrain were overwhelmed by the push to find another orthodoxy. From one angle the history of the movement boils down to a series of such shifts, with each juncture seeing a previously dominant group fall by the wayside and a new organization rise to proclaim that at last the true path had been found. From the early 1970s to the 1980s this process was repeated again and again – each time with more fallout. By the late 1980s too little energy or confidence was left for another cycle.  
>

> The movement’s narrow conception of revolutionary theory also contributed mightily to its descent into the sect-building trap. For a sect, allegiance to past doctrine takes priority over engaging with current reality. Doing battle with heresy takes precedence over finding common ground with others. Control over affiliated “mass organizations” is equated with leading popular movements. Most of the largest groups avoided the worst manifestations of sectarianism for at least few years. But even the most broad-minded ultimately succumbed to the lure of such a mechanical and miniaturized version of Leninism.  
>
> Indeed, at the very moments when the most promising organizations seemed on the verge of breaking out of their sect mentality, they typically became dizzy with their small-scale success and lost sight of the tremendous distance between their initial accomplishments and what it would take to become a historically significant force. Instead of accepting and grappling with all the complexities that accompany building deep ties to the working class, they retreated to the safe ground of doctrinal purity and of being a big fish in a small pond.  
>
> From the outset, some voices called for a different kind of engagement with the inherited traditions of Marxism-Leninism. But the cadre and friendly critics who warned that the movement was making fundamental errors were unable to forge a viable alternative. Some were able to sustain local organizing collectives for a few years, and others managed to publish insightful journals. (Here Radical America stands out for voicing an antidogmatic working class view throughout the 1970s). But none of them reached the minimum threshold of numbers, multiracial composition or coherence to challenge antirevisionism’s hegemony among those seeking a collective, working class–based revolutionary project.  
>
> Since 1989–90, few activists have gravitated toward Maoism or any other variant of Marxism-Leninism. Indeed, it is extremely unlikely that many people radicalized in the coming decade will turn in that direction. The collapse of the USSR; China’s reliance on capitalist methods; the absence of a powerful constellation of communist-led national liberation movements – these and other changes mean that Leninism is nowhere near the pole of attraction it was in the late 1960s. But voluntarism, dogmatism, sectarianism and undemocratic practices are afflictions that can be rationalized by a multitude of ideological prescriptions, not just Marxism-Leninism. They have hardly been eliminated from popular movements, and it can only help to record one more warning of their destructive power.  
>
> Furthermore, the tendency to reduce the complex process of building a radical organization to a simplistic recipe for sect-building – as well as the temptation to see the demise of capitalism as only one more big mass upheaval away – are hardly blunders that come only in packages labeled “Maoist Fundamentalism – Activist Beware!” To the contrary, they have arisen in different forms over many decades. They reflect deep-going spontaneous sentiments among individuals first turning to revolutionary politics – especially youth radicalized in any tumultuous period when the injustices of society loom much larger than long-range historical perspectives. For these reasons, ultraleft and dogmatic perspectives were deeply absorbed by the young activists who forged the New Communist Movement, though the rhetoric and reasoning justifying their course was specific to their situation, time and place. One of the valuable lessons from this movement, then, is how profoundly a flawed ideological framework can undercut even the most dynamic movement.  
>

> The movement shunned the path of least resistance taken by most other multiracial or mainly white left tendencies to base itself in the disproportionately white intelligentsia and professional strata. Instead, it made a sustained effort to sink roots in the more integrated strata of the working class and in communities of color. Antirevisionists insisted on the need to build multiracial organizations – and showed that a group that makes antiracism a priority in its theory, organizing and internal life can break deep-rooted patterns of segregation. The most success was achieved by groups that refused to gloss over special oppression in the name of fostering class unity; gave priority to the particular demands of peoples of color; paid careful attention to the racial composition at events or activities; implemented racially conscious cadre training and promotion policies; and published materials in Spanish, Chinese and other languages. Movement activists drew on the best experience of both the CPUSA and the New Left in facing up to the inevitable tensions that accompany intense day-to-day interactions between people of diverse backgrounds, and in trying to deal with those via education and criticism. Mistakes and weaknesses abounded, but overall movement cadre of all racial and national backgrounds displayed admirable tenacity and insight in this often-volatile area.  
>
